# Goals and hypotheses

*Alternative RNA structures formed during
transcription depend on elongation rate and modify
RNA processing* lays out a methods for mapping RNA secondary
structure in nascent RNA genome wide. Authors compare structure in
wildtype and slow polymerase. We would predict that highly structured RNA would decrease R-loop formation.

Expect to see

- Regions of above average RNA structure show lower R-loop signal when comparing wildtype pol to DRIP data
- SMRF-seq initiation sites will have lower or degree of structure not significantly different than mean structure

# Getting into the data

The main data I am interested in are measurements of RNA double strandedness. This includes DMS reactivity scores which actually indicate single-strandedness (lack of score = double stranded) and
structure scores, which indicate double strandedness and are calculated as a statistic the authors came up with.

## DMS reactivity

From the methods section

```
Following sequencing of tNet-MaP-seq libraries, duplicates were removed and adaptors trimmed using bbTools dedup and deduk
functions (BBMap – Bushnell B. – https://sourceforge.net/projects/bbmap). 

Trimmed reads were mapped uniquely against the
hg19 genome using hisat2 (Pertea et al., 2016). Unmapped reads were remapped using bowtie2 on the local setting. Substitutions,
insertions and deletions in the DMS libraries were identified by post-processing the output of samtools mpileup (v1.9) (Li, 2011)
after subtracting the background in the DMSO control with custom scripts (https://github.com/rnabioco/rnastruct) to generate
mutation frequencies per nucleotide. 

Nucleotides were required to have a read depth of 15, and only primary alignments with MAPQ > 0 were processed. Deletions spanning greater than 4 nucleotides were not counted. Indels were left-aligned and assigned to the first nucleotide of the indel. The RNA-seq libraries were stranded and therefore the alignments were partitioned into those deriving from sense or antisense orientations prior to processing to maintain strand information.

DMS reactivities were then calculated by subtracting the mutation frequencies from the untreated controls from the DMS treated samples to generate background corrected reactivity. Positions with reactivity values of less than zero were set to 0.001 and positions with reactivity greater than 0.1
were set to 0.1.
```

The paper links to [this pipeline on GitHub](https://github.com/rnabioco/rnastruct) which seems to just generate mutation rates (indicating single-strandedness) per nucleotide. Mapping and the rest is up to you. 


## Structure scores

Less code availability than DMS calculations, they give same overview of the tools used and the formula for calculating scores. Looks like will need implementation either way. 

General outline of method across splice sites 

- Remove duplicates with bbtools
- Trim adapters using catadpt (need to get adapter file)
- Map reads against hg19 uniquely with Bowtie2
    - First they used hisat2, then mapped unmapped reads with Bowtie2, why not just map with Bowtie?
    - Quality score of 2 or greater (low?)
- Convert results to bed
- Calculate coverage per nucleotide using bedtools genome cov and extract
  positions covered by > 9 reads in either in RNaseI treated or RNaseV1 treated
- 

Also emailed PI David Bentley about additional code availability, waiting to hear back on that one.


## General tool notes

- Reads mapped to hg19
- Reads mapping to rRNA or mitochondria where removed
- PCR duplicates removed with bbtools version 38.86

# Structure score implementation

Need to gather up replicates that are treated with either RNaseI, RNaseV1 (
in methods they call RNaseVI RNaseV1).

Something to note is that coverage for both RNAseI and VI go into the
actual calculation. But based on the filtering we are doing there
are definitely going to be regions that do not overlap, meaning
coverage for one of the variables will be zero and therefore
not show up if just doing a bedtools intersection or equilvant
operation before calculating scores. 

Also what are scores for regions without coverage? Ignore?





